---
layout: post
title: Glikoz update
date: 2023-11-22 15:30:00-0300
description: We officially have a decent version! And plans for the future
tags: python
giscus_comments: false
related_posts: false
thumbnail: assets/img/glikoz_logo.png
---

> Check out [Glikoz @ GitHub](https://github.com/almeidaraul/glikoz)

I have just finished pushing some small changes to the main glikoz
branch, and finally I can call it something I'd be okay with using
for the rest of my life. This opens up space to doing cool things
and making things look better, but first I'll get into some detail
about what are the most important features in glikoz, at least
for me.

# What we have
First of all, glikoz works with exports from a very well-established
OSS app for recording blood sugar and other relevant information,
namely Diaguard. This was very important for me from the beginning,
coming from proprietary software that was very restrictive in letting
users access their own data in a raw format.

With that data, we have all the basic analyses. It is always important
for a doctor and their diabetic patients to keep track of how their
Time in Range and HbA1c are going. Glikoz reports both the time in range
and the estimated HbA1c (you can find references on how the HbA1c is
estimated in the GitHub repository). Besides that, the usage of test
strips, lancets and fast-acting insulin is reported to help with
managing the use of these very expensive resources.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/glikoz1.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/glikoz2.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
  24-hour graphs for mean glucose and time-specific time in range.
</div>

There is also a 24 hour graph with the mean glucose by hour and the reported
minimum/maximum as well, and another that presents the Time in Range for
each hour instead of all the entries. These are both very important for
a less-biased, in-depth review of blood sugar behaviour.

For the PDF reports to be useful in actual day-to-day patient data analysis,
glikoz also includes a day-by-day table view of the most recent entries.
This allows for a close look at what the treatment is looking like on a
daily basis.

Finally, I added a special page for hypoglycemia-related statistics,
reporting the number and percentage of episodes and a graphical view of the
distribution of episodes among danger levels. Hypoglycemia is one of the
most dangerous aspects of Type 1 Diabetes, and I feel other softwares
don't go far beyond the simple time-in-range graph. I would say this is one
of the most important features in glikoz right now.

# How it was built
I used Python3 for all of glikoz. Since the scope of processing is still
very small, and to use it as a proof of concept, Pandas and NumPy are
used for data analysis. If you consider that the average user will input
about 15 entries every day, we are talking about less than 6 thousand entries
(i.e., table rows) in a year, meaning we can allow for even very slow
algorithms (think cubic) before starting to worry about execution time.

In the future I plan on switching to something distributed, of course,
but Pandas will be more than enough in the meantime.

# Plans for the future
There are, of course, infinite features I want to add to glikoz. One of those
that will have to wait a while longer, for example, is reporting analyses with
Boukeh, which would allow us to create web-based interactive reports. Another
is machine learning-powered analysis to provide insights about the treatment
and optimization of insulin dosage parameters based on recent data.

The two most important things, though, and these are the ones I'll be working
on next, are documentation and libre integration.

I made sure to write readable code with inline documentation (and since a while
ago I've been doing test-driven development, which helps with that), but I feel
glikoz still lacks a textual explanation of its purpose, architecture and
backlog. This is not a coding task, which might be the reason for me not having
done it yet, but still it's very important.

And the Freestyle Libre integration is probably the most useful thing I can do to access
more data. This will allow for minute-by-minute analysis of blood sugar behavior.
I'm really looking forward to it. Since this means a lot more data, however,
I plan on moving to SQL-powered analysis wherever possible. This will also help
in scaling later on.

# Final remarks
Well, that was it. I truly am excited to continue working on glikoz, and I hope
I can learn a lot from these next steps.
